The Gnostic Society Library

| Valentinus Index |  Gnostic Society Library | Gnosis Archive |



Notable Valentinian Personalities

Adelphius               Demostratus             Marcus
Agathopous              Epiphanes               Philokomos
Alexander               Flavia Sophe            Prodicus
Ambrose                 Flora                   Ptolemy
Aquilinus               Florinus                Rheginus
Ardesianus              Helix                   Secundus
Axionicus               Herakleon               Theodotus
Beron                   Julius Cassian          Theotimus
Candidus                Kolarbassos             Theudas
Cleobulus               Leucius



══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Adelphius

Rome, mid to late 3rd century

He was a Valentinian who joined Plotinus' Neoplatonist school in Rome
about 263 AD. Along with Aquilinus, Adelphius lead a Valentinian circle
within the Neoplatonist school. In about 268 AD, Plotinus wrote "Against
the Gnostics" (Enneads II:9) in order to curb their growing influence. The
Valentinian character of his teaching is clear from Plotinus. (See
articles in Wallis, 1992).

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Agathopous

Alexandria? mid 2nd century

Agathapous was an early disciple of Valentinus, likely at Alexandria. He
was the addressee of an Epistle to Agathapous of which a brief excerpt
survives. Nothing else is known about him.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Alexander

Libya, early 3rd century

He was one of the most renowned Valentinian teachers of the third century.
He is mentioned by both the orthodox writer Tertullian and the pagan
philosopher Porphyry. Based on what Tertullian says of him, Alexander's
Christology is rather similar to that of Ptolemy. None of his writings
survive.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Ambrose

Alexandria, early third century

Ambrose was an independently wealthy merchant. He was the financial
benefactor of both Valentinian teachers and orthodox Christian teachers
such as Origen.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Aquilinus

Rome, mid to late third century

He was a Valentinian who joined Plotinus' Neoplatonist school in Rome
about 263 AD. Along with Adelphius, Aquilinus lead a Valentinian circle
within the Neoplatonist school. In about 268 AD, Plotinus wrote "Against
the Gnostics" (Enneads II:9) in order to curb their growing influence. The
Valentinian character of his teaching is clear from Plotinus. (See
articles in Wallis, 1992).

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Ardesianus

Edessa? late 2nd and early third centuries

Ardesianus is described by Hippolytus as an eastern Valentinian teacher.
Many scholars have assumed that Hippolytus is mistakenly accusing the
Syrian Church Father Bardaisan of being a Valentinian. However, Hippolytus
may instead be referring to some otherwise unknown Valentinian teacher.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Axionicus

Antioch, late 2nd and early third centuries

He was such a formidable proponent of Valentinian teaching that Tertullian
describes him as "doing honor to the memory of Valentinus". It is likely
that excerpts of his writings survive in the Gospel of Philip, a Syrian
anthology of Valentinian sources.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Beron

Rome, early third century

According to Hippolytus, Beron was a dissident Valentinian who taught that
"the flesh assumed to Himself by the Word became capable of working like
works with the deity by virtue of its assumption, and that the deity
became susceptible of suffering in the same way with the flesh by virtue
of the exinanition" (Against Beron and Helix). He seems to have been
closely associated with another teacher named Helix.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Candidus

Athens, early third century

Perhaps the most important Valentinian teacher at Athens, he was also a
renowned champion of Valentinian teachings. In 229, he debated Origen, the
famous orthodox theologian at that time. A record of their debate
circulated in the ancient world but has been lost.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Cleobulus

Alexandria or Syria? second century?

He is mentioned in connection with Theodotus in the long version of
Ignatius' Epistle to the Trallians. Nothing else is known about him.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Demostratus

Lydia, third century

He is mentioned briefly by Porphyry (Life of Plotinus) in conjunction with
Philokomos and Alexander as a source of the Valentinian teaching spread in
the Neoplatonist school by Adelphius and Aquilinus.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Epiphanes

?

Epiphanes may or not be historical. A passage in Irenaeus which is
normally translated as "Another prominent teacher among them..." can also
be translated as "Epiphanes, a teacher among them..." (AH 1:11:3). The
teachings about the Tetrad which follow are also recounted almost word for
word in the account of Marcus' system (AH 1:15:1). If the former
translation is correct, then it is likely that the "prominent teacher" is
actually Marcus. If Epiphanes did exist, he is not to be confused with the
Carpocratian teacher of the same name.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Flavia Sophe

Rome, late 3rd century

She was a Valentinian woman whose tomb inscription survives. The
inscription reads, "Thou, filled with longing for the paternal light,
Sister and spouse, my Sophe, Annointed in the baths of Christ with
immortal sacred salve, Hasten to glimpse the divine features of the Aeons,
The great angel of the great council, the true Son; Thou camest into the
bridal chamber and deathless climbed Into the bosom of the Father."
(translation from Gnosis by Robert Haardt)

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Flora

Rome, mid 2nd century

She was an educated convert to whom Ptolemy addressed his letter on the
Law. Nothing else is known about her.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Florinus

Rome, late second century

Originally from Smyrna in Asia Minor (modern Turkey), he was a well known
Valentinian teacher. He became a presbyter at Rome around 200 AD. He
likely received the position as a concession to the Valentinians who
formed a substantial portion of the Roman congregation. When 'orthodox'
fanatic Irenaeus of Lyon found out about the appointment, he wrote a
heated letter to the bishop of Rome demanding that Florinus be dismissed.
It is unclear whether Irenaeus got his way. Florinus wrote a treatise "On
the Eight" which is now lost.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Helix

Rome, early third century

Along with Beron, Helix was one of the leaders of a Valentinian faction
which was involved in a dispute with other Valentinians over christology.
They taught that Jesus' human nature shared to a certain extent in
divinity and that his divine nature shared in his suffering. The orthodox
teacher Hippolytus wrote the treatise 'Against Beron and Helix' to refute
their views.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Herakleon

Rome, mid to late second century

Originally from Sicily, he later moved to Rome where he became a disciple
of Valentinus. He was one of the most important Biblical exegetes of his
day. His writings were very well regarded even by orthodox theologians
such as Origen and Clement of Alexandria. He wrote a extensive commentary
on the Gospel of John, parts of which survive. Excerpts from other works
are preserved by Clement of Alexandria. Some modern scholars have
attempted to identify him as the author of the Tripartite Tractate.
However, this is unlikely.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Julius Cassian

Alexandria, late 2nd or early 3rd century

Julius was a Valentinian who split with the remainder of the school over
the issue of marriage. He completely rejected marriage as sinful while
most Valentinians did not. A few quatations from his writing On Continence
survive in Clement of Alexandria. Some have attributed the Testimony of
Truth found at Nag Hammadi to him. However, this cannot be proven.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Kolarbassos

Kolarbassos appears to be a historical fiction. The name is derived from
Hebrew kol-arba ("all is four") and was used by some Valentinians to
designate the first Four Aeons. The teacher Marcus claimed a vision in
which he was taught by the original Four (Kolorbassos) in the form of
Silence. The orthodox teachers Hippolytus and Irenaeus misunderstood this
and believed that Kolorbassos was a person.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Leucius

Syria, late 2nd century

According to tradition, Leucius is the compiler of the Acts of John, a
collection of legends about the apostle. He incorporated traditional
Valentinian materials into the Acts of John. The best known of these
materials are the so-called "round dance" and a revelation of the mystery
of the Cross.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Marcus

Alexandria, Lyon, Asia Minor mid to late 2nd century

One of the most important of Valentinus' disciples at Alexandria was
Marcus. Like his teacher, he undertook a great deal of missionary work.
His activity in Lyon brought him into conflict with Irenaeus who was the
bishop there. Irenaeus portrays Marcus as a philandering magician.
However, these charges are unfounded and seem to have their origin in
Irenaeus' personal antagonism towards his rival. Marcus claimed to have
had a vision of the divine feminine in the form of Silence. He details
this vision in a work that Irenaeus transmits almost intact. Numerology
plays an important role in Marcus' teaching. Extensive quotes from several
of his writings survive in Irenaeus of Lyon.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Philokomos

Rome? third century

He is mentioned briefly by Porphyry (Life of Plotinus) in conjunction with
Demostratus and Alexander as a source of the Valentinian teaching spread
in the Neoplatonist school by Adelphius and Aquilinus.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Prodicus

Alexandria? late second century

He is mentioned twice by Tertullian in connection with Valentinus. His
disciples were known to Clement of Alexandria. He rejected prayer and
taught that the elect, being "lords of the Sabbath", had no need of the
written Law (Clement of Alexandria in Stromateis III: 30).

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Ptolemy

Rome, mid second century

He was the most important of Valentinus' early disciples at Rome. He was
the one who developed Valentinus' ideas into a consistent theological
system. Ptolemy may be identical with the martyr of the same name. After
Ptolemy converted a wealthy Roman woman to Christianity, her husband
denounced him to the authorities. He was imprisoned about 160 AD and
eventually executed. A description of his systematic theology is preserved
by Irenaeus. A Letter to Flora also survives.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Rheginus

Alexandria? second or third century

He is the addressee of the Treatise on Resurrection. Nothing else is known
about him.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Secundus

Rome, mid 2nd century

He was one of Valentinus' earliest disciples at Rome. Nothing else is
known about him apart from a very brief outline of some of his teachings
by Irenaeus (Against Heresies 1:11:2). His ideas are quite similar to
those of his contemporaries such as Ptolemy. None of his writings survive.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Theodotus

Alexandria, mid to late 2nd century

He was one of the earliest followers of Valentinus at Alexandria. After
Valentinus departed for Rome, he became the leading teacher of the
Alexandrian school. No other details are known about his life. A
substantial portion of his writings are preserved in the Excerpts of
Theodotus.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Theotimus

Rome? late second century

Very little is known about him. Tertullian mentions that Theotimus wrote a
work entitled "On the Images of the Law". This work appears to be lost
unless it is to be identified with the passages quoted by Irenaeus in
regard to Valentinian Old Testament interpretation (Against Heresies
1:17:1-18:3). These passages are often attributed to Marcus.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Theudas

Alexandria, late first to early second centuries

He was Valentinus' teacher at Alexandria. According to Valentinian
tradition, Theudas had been a disciple of Saint Paul and transmitted a
secret Pauline tradition to Valentinus. Nothing else is known about this
enigmatic figure. He is not to be confused with Theodotus, a later
disciple of Valentinus.



Content authored by David Brons

